#
# List of known perf commands.
# command name			category [deprecated] [common]
#
perf-annotate			mainporcelain common
perf-archive			mainporcelain common
perf-bench			mainporcelain common
perf-buildid-cache		mainporcelain common
perf-buildid-list		mainporcelain common
perf-data			mainporcelain common
perf-diff			mainporcelain common
perf-c2c			mainporcelain common
perf-config			mainporcelain common
perf-evlist			mainporcelain common
perf-ftrace			mainporcelain common
perf-inject			mainporcelain common
perf-iostat			mainporcelain common
perf-kallsyms			mainporcelain common
perf-kmem			mainporcelain traceevent
perf-kvm			mainporcelain common
perf-kwork			mainporcelain traceevent
perf-list			mainporcelain common
perf-lock			mainporcelain traceevent
perf-mem			mainporcelain common
perf-probe			mainporcelain full
perf-record			mainporcelain common
perf-report			mainporcelain common
perf-sched			mainporcelain traceevent
perf-script			mainporcelain common
perf-stat			mainporcelain common
perf-test			mainporcelain common
perf-timechart			mainporcelain traceevent
perf-top			mainporcelain common
perf-trace			mainporcelain audit
perf-version			mainporcelain common
perf-daemon			mainporcelain common
