# SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
generic-y += dma-contiguous.h
generic-y += mcs_spinlock.h
generic-y += parport.h
generic-y += early_ioremap.h
generic-y += qrwlock.h
generic-y += rwsem.h
generic-y += segment.h
generic-y += user.h
generic-y += stat.h
generic-y += fcntl.h
generic-y += ioctl.h
generic-y += ioctls.h
generic-y += mman.h
generic-y += msgbuf.h
generic-y += sembuf.h
generic-y += shmbuf.h
generic-y += statfs.h
generic-y += socket.h
generic-y += sockios.h
generic-y += termbits.h
generic-y += poll.h
generic-y += param.h
generic-y += posix_types.h
generic-y += resource.h
generic-y += kvm_para.h
